# Cuttlefish

Cuttlefish is a tool for deploying in-memory Ceph clusters on HPC
clusters for benchmarking purposes. It requires no root permissions or
backing storage for OSDs, and is very fast: both in terms of setup and
teardown time, but also in terms of cluster performance, since everything
is in-memory.

> [!CAUTION]
> Cuttlefish is not designed for production use.

# Setup

## Requirements

Cuttlefish assumes that you have the following available on your HPC
cluster:

- A recent Python installation (recommended: 3.11+)
- Apptainer 1.20+
- Internet access on all cluster nodes, either directly or with properly
  configured proxy settings sufficient for downloading Python packages
- Shared filesystem with the same mount point on all nodes, where this
  repository will be stored
- Local filesystem with sufficient free space (~1GB) for storage of
  temporary files, cache, and Python virtual environment. Using tmpfs is
  possible and recommended.
- Slurm as the HPC cluster resource manager

## Installation

1. Clone this repo into a **shared filesystem**:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/beanfacts/cuttlefish
```

2. Activate a Python virtual environment and install the Cuttlefish package

```bash
cd cuttlefish
python3 -m venv .venv
pip install -e pkg
```

## Ceph Config Files

To set up the Ceph cluster, you will need a valid `ceph.conf` and keyring.

### Core `ceph.conf`

For the `ceph.conf` file, see the file `conf/ceph.sample.conf` and
modify this to your liking and rename it to `ceph.conf`.

DO NOT modify the following:

- `mon_host` or `mon_initial_members`: These are generated by the
  Cuttlefish deployment/placement scripts!
- `osd_objectstore`: Keep this as memstore; Cuttlefish does not support
  any other OSD types!
- `memstore_device_bytes`: The deployment script can set the correct
  value for `memstore_device_bytes` automatically depending on a memory
  target.

### Keyring

The keyring file must only be generated once and can be reused
indefinitely so long as the number of daemons you want to set up does
not exceed what is defined in the keyring. 

Run `cuttle keyring -h` for help.

Example command to generate a keyring file named `keyring` containing
128 OSD keys, 64 MDS keys, 64 manager keys, and 64 RGW keys:

```bash
cuttle keyring --osd 128 --mds 64 --mgr 64 --rgw 64 -f keyring
```

## Helper Script Modification

HPC cluster software setups are very different and Cuttlefish must be
provided with the correct software environment.

1. Modify `scripts/base_conf.sh` if you do not want to use `/tmp` as the
   temporary storage location for Cuttlefish data and/or change other
   constants, such as the logging location.
2. Modify `scripts/setup.sh` such that it loads the correct Python
   version. The current script assumes a module system such as lmod
   provides the latest Python version as a package named `python` with
   `gcc` as a requirement to load it, as this is the software setup of
   the GWDG compute cluster.
3. Modify `scripts/wrapper.sh` such that it loads Python and Apptainer
   correctly for your HPC cluster. Additionally, if some MPI network
   transports do not work inside your Apptainer setup, change the
   environment variables for them here.

## Node Allocation

You must first allocate a job named `cuttlefish` using Slurm.  

Example for a 16-node allocation:

```bash
salloc -N 16 --exclusive -J cuttlefish
```

Note requirements specific to your HPC cluster, such as the requirement to
select a partition, account, QoS queue, etc., may be required and cannot be
detailed here. An exclusive allocation is not strictly required but recommended
for performance reasons.

Check it's running:

```
$ squeue --me
      NAME     STATE NODES NODELIST(REASON)
cuttlefish   RUNNING    16 ggpu[102-113,115,125-127]
```
(output reduced for clarity)

## Image

Since the Ceph images are OCI images, you will first need to convert them into
Apptainer SIF images. This can be done simply with the Apptainer CLI:

```bash
apptainer pull docker://quay.io/ceph/ceph:v20.2.0
```

... which creates a file such as `ceph_v20.2.0.sif`. Please ensure this file is
**also** on the shared filesystem, as all nodes will need access to it.

You can also use a custom image with a custom Ceph installation but this is not
detailed here.

## Manifest Generation

Cuttlefish's **manifest** defines the entire state of the cluster and is the
single file containing all information required to set it up. Run `cuttle
manifest -h` for all options; there are many!

Example command:

```bash
cuttle manifest \
  --config conf/ceph.conf \
  --keyring conf/keyring \
  --osd 48 \
  --mon 1 \
  --mgr 1 \
  --mds 4 \
  --nodecount 7 \
  --mem-target 192 \
  -i ceph_v20.2.0.sif
```

... generates a `manifest.json` file with...
- The config read from `conf/ceph.conf`
- The keyring read from `conf/keyring`
- 48 OSDs distributed across cluster nodes
- 1 monitor
- 1 manager
- 4 MDS daemons
- Limiting the cluster size to 7 of the allocated nodes 
  - Useful if you want to e.g., benchmark the cluster using different nodes from the same allocation
- The absolute path to the image `ceph_v20.2.0.sif` stored
- A limit of 192 GB for memstore OSDs per node
  - e.g., if there are 8 OSDs on the most heavily loaded node, each OSD
    will be 192/8 = 24 GB in size.

> [!WARNING] 
> After you generate this manifest, changes to `ceph.conf` or `keyring`
> files will not affect the deployment unless you re-run the manifest
> generator! This also means that the `ceph.conf` and `keyring` files 
> are no longer used after you generate the manifest.

> [!WARNING] 
> The absolute path to the Cuttlefish repo, `manifest.json`, and Ceph
> container image must match on all nodes and be on the same shared
> storage, or the cluster will fail to deploy!

## Node Preparation

The environment must be set up on all of the cluster nodes before
deployment. This must only be done once per manifest regeneration, and
depending on the network should take anywhere from a few seconds to at
most a few minutes.

Run:

```bash
cuttle deploy --prepare
```

... which produces output similar to this:

```
Executing 100%|███████████████████████████████| 7/7 [00:14<00:00, 0.52 nodes/s]
```

## Deployment

Once the preparation is complete, you can deploy the cluster.

```bash
cuttle deploy
```

... which shows only the progress as well:

```
Executing 100%|███████████████████████████████| 7/7 [00:14<00:00, 0.52 nodes/s]
```

## Validating Cluster Configuration

Cuttlefish provides a wrapper which allows you to run the Ceph shell
inside the Apptainer image used to deploy the cluster. It implicitly
runs the Ceph shell; you can use `-s` to pass a shell script or pass an
argument to the Ceph CLI directly by adding arguments.

```bash
cuttle shell status
```

is the equivalent to `ceph status` and produces:

```
  cluster:
    id:     b601c2b8-11c2-4337-b333-65102b5e9474
    health: HEALTH_WARN
            mon is allowing insecure global_id reclaim
 
  services:
    mon: 1 daemons, quorum ggpu102 (age 47m) [leader: ggpu102]
    mgr: 0(active, since 47m)
    osd: 48 osds: 48 up (since 46m), 48 in (since 47m)
 
  data:
    pools:   1 pools, 1 pgs
    objects: 2 objects, 449 KiB
    usage:   21 MiB used, 1.1 TiB / 1.1 TiB avail
    pgs:     1 active+clean
```

## Debugging

Cuttlefish provides a small helper to allow you to SSH directly to a
node hosting a specific daemon.

```bash
cuttle shell --ssh osd.0
```

This command will create an SSH connection to the node hosting `osd.0`,
but notably does **not** create a shell session inside the `osd.0`
container!

# Teardown

Teardown is straightforward. Run:

```bash
cuttle teardown
```

# License

Copyright (c) 2024 - 2026 Tim Dettmar

Licensed under AGPL 3.0